[MUSIC]
In this video I'm gonna be
covering a few new concepts.
One is the singleton pattern,
and that will help us when we
load from one scene to the next,
help us keep our score to remember
the score from one scene to the next.
Also I'll be talking about destroy and
load, which we'll be using as part of
the singleton pattern as well as looking
at the script execution order in Unity.
So let's start this process.
First of all what I want to do is just
give myself a few less blocks here so
it's very easy to load from
one level to the next.
And I will delete most of these.
Just leave one remaining and save.
Go over to my other level.
My other level I am going to,
what did I forget to do last time?
Okay, I needed to click on Game Status and
we haven't given our game status a score
text, so we need to grab on Game Canvas,
grab our score text and
drag that into our score text.
Now when we click play on this level,
our score will update.
That's something we didn't check last
time around, okay, now it does update.
Okay cool.
Now, next up what we wanna do is say,
how can we make our score load
from one level to the next?
Let's see what happens at the moment.
Back over to saving this level, back over
to Level 2, so there's only one block.
When I click on Play and
Shoot the ball at the block.
Score goes up but
then it goes back down to 0 again.
And what's going on here?
Why is this happening?
Let me do a little bit of diagramming for
you here.
Let me grab my fancy pen.
If I can grab it, cool.
Now what's going on here at
the moment is we have level,
we'll call it our first level and
second level.
I know my order is a little bit messed
up with my naming and my order, and
we'll say we've got 1, 2 and 3.
Now, what's going on at the moment
is we have our games status script,
which is starting off our score at 0.
And that's very useful for us,
because if we start testing at level 3,
we want everything to start from fresh,
we wanna start from 0.
If we start testing at level 28,
then we want everything to
start from fresh at level 28.
When we're in level 1,
that makes great sense, we start off at 0,
we play the game for a little bit,
we get a score of 83.
But then when we jump over to level 2,
we expect the 83 to persist.
You don't want as a [LAUGH] player for
your score to go back to 0 at every level,
that's not so fun.
What's happening is when we start level 2,
it's saying, okay load
GameStatus script all over again, at which
point it says score should start at 0.
Everything from level 1, or
our first level, gets unloaded and
destroyed and no longer exists.
And all the new stuff
in this level appears.
Same thing when we go
from level 2 to level 3.
Everything in previous levels gets just,
in previous scenes,
we'll call it scenes levels,
I'm using interchangeably.
But from a unity point of view from
the previous scene is gone, and
all the new things appear
in the next scene.
Okay, let's make sure that we don't
have a whole bunch of junk that
follows us around.
We got a whole bunch of things, we go
to the next one those things continue.
We get all these game objects and
elements and things.
And by the time we get to level 28,
we've got 1,000 game objects and and
our game is grinding to a halt.
So, this is a great mechanism within
Unity to make sure that we just have what
we want in particular scene.
But what do we do about this problem?
That we want some things to persist
from one scene to the next,
well what we do is we implement what
is called the Singleton pattern.
Okay, it's an approach.
It's not a specific set of code,
there's many ways to do this,
many ways to write it, but
it's an approach, and what that means is,
just resetting my screen,
if we have our first scene loaded.
Number 1.
And we'll say we're using
GameStatus.cs again.
This is our class.
I'll just abbreviate as GS, GameStatus.
When we load from scene 1 to scene 2,
what we can say is that when scene
2 tries to load its GameStatus,
it says if there already exists
a game status then don't load me.
Just allow this one to continue and
what we need to do is implement some
special code called Don't Destroy On Load.
So that it knows to stick around and
not to destroy itself when
we load the next scene.
And anything in the next
scene we need to say destroy.
If there's already one that exists.
And how I normally view
this is like Highlander.
I don't know if you know the old,
old movie or if you've seen the memes, but
there can be only one.
That's basically the Singleton pattern or
there can be only one if you
look at that one [INAUDIBLE].
So there can be only one, that's what
the Singleton pattern is all about.
Okay so what we're going to do in
our gamestatus.cs is to say in here
if there already exists a game
status then don't load yourself.
Or more specifically destroy yourself.
And if there's not then
keep yourself around.
And where do we do that?
Where with the now script
we need to write that code?
Well this is a chance for
us to have another conversation
about a new concept which
is Unity's execution order.
I've got a link I've given you in
the resources to the documentation of
the Unity execution order.
I'm gonna zoom all the way out so
you can see.
We're looking at this particular diagram
just here, that's the context of it.
Zoom back in so you can see what
the font and the text actually says.
And what's going on here is
when we are executing a script.
This is the flow chart here.
The script lifecycle.
At the very start we have
the initialization phase.
That just happens at the very
start of the script.
It doesn't happen over and over.
It just happens once at the start and
we have some timing we can use.
The very, very first thing
that gets called is awake.
And we use Start a lot,
that's a good place for
us to do all of our initialization.
If we wanna do something before Start,
we can put it in Awake.
And then what happens over
the execution is that
then we start to get into the things that
happens once per frame, zoom out again.
You can see that this thicker black
line that runs along here is showing all
the things that happen per frame, every
single frame these things are happening.
And if you're not familiar with
what that means, per frame,
let me just very quickly explain that.
Because a couple of people out there
asked questions about this is,
if you've heard of the terminology FPS
which could refer to first person shooter.
In this case,
it's referring to Frames Per Second.
And if you've got a really fast, amazing
computer you might get a lot of frames per
second because a lot of things can be
calculated with your amazing computer.
You might get 100 frames per second.
If you've got an old piece of junk
computer that's not very good,
really terrible,
maybe you get one frame per second.
Which is gonna make
a pretty bad experience,
because if you've got a character running
across the screen you'll see a frame this
second and then you'll see another frame
after 2 seconds and then you'll see
another frame after 3 seconds, and
it will be a little bit of a nightmare.
If you've got a faster computer,
then this 1 second
you'll have 100 of these frames
that are doing particular things.
Okay, that's what frames per
second is all about, and
that's what frames we're talking about.
Within Unity it's trying to calculate
over and over every frame it does things.
Every frame it does things.
And also the physics loop happens
multiple times per frame.
It's looping over and over and over.
It's like on collision.
It's calling, it's checking [SOUND] many,
many times because process
is nowadays super fast.
We could be getting thousands,
hundreds of thousands of operations I'm
guessing in the hundreds of thousands.
But we can get a lot of
operations in a second.
So where then out of all these
steps in our script execution order
do we need to put our Singleton.
We're gonna put it at the very,
very, very start which is on awake.
And the reason we put it there is just
in case we want something else to happen
at the start of our script.
For example we're using the Start
method here to do some things,
we wanna use awake so it happens before
anything else can kick into place.
Right okay so that's a lot of talking,
hopefully you've stuck
with me through that.
Now we'll do some typing.
At the above start,
above our Start method,
we'll give ourselves a couple of lines and
we'll say void Awake.
And I'm gonna hit tab
to autocomplete that.
So as a very starting point, we need a way
to store in a variable the number of game
status objects that there currently
are in our scene, in our game.
So we'll start by saying int,
we'll call this an integer,
gameStatusCount, in other
words how many can you find.
Now we'll = FindObjects,
with an s, OfType.
I'm just gonna double,
triple highlight that.
In this case we're using ObjectsOfType,
looking to see how many objects are there.
We've been using FindObject Of type in
some of our other code more recently.
But this one requires an s.
I'm just saying this five times because
I know people often miss that s.
I've missed it many times and not been
able to figure out why because they're
very, very similar object and
objects of type.
And then we're looking for GameStatus.
And open, close parenthesis.
And how do we know how many there are?
Well, we can type .length and then ;.
That's gonna say this will be storing
how many games status objects
there currently are.
Now we wanna write ourselves
an if statement, so
we say if Game not tame
gameStatusCount is greater than 1.
And the reason it's greater than 1
is we're saying if 1 already exists.
And when I'm trying to create myself in
this script when I'm trying to execute
myself I'm going to be number 2.
If I'm number 2 then we're
saying it's greater than 1.
But if I'm the first one to come along,
then currently gameStatusCount isn't
greater than 1, because it would be
just 1, because I'm the first one.
Okay, and then open and
close curly brackets.
And in here what do you
think we wanna say?
If there's already more than 1,
what do we do?
Remember there can be only one.
We say Destroy, we destroy what?
Well we destroy the object,
the gameObject.
In other words this particular gameObject
that is trying to create itself.
So if there's more than one, destroy
yourself, jump on your sword so to speak.
Otherwise, or else,
in a programming terminology,
else we use our nifty
DontDestroyOnLoad method.
And within there we put, again,
gameObject, and this is our way of saying,
if there's already more than one, destroy
yourself, if there's not already more than
one, then don't destroy when
the level loads in the future.
I'm gonna save that and
show you exactly what's going on here
when we I'm gonna go over to the other
level again because it's a little bit.
I have to click on the proper spots.
Scenes it's a little bit cleaner.
My level that's only got one block in it.
When I click on play you'll see over on
the left here game status disappears.
But we have this DontDestroyOnLoad,
which appears, and
Game Status is now
childed underneath that.
So it now belongs to DontDestroyOnLoad,
which is saying,
you're gonna stick around even
when the very next scene loads.
And let's test that out
by plunking the scene,
you can see DontDestroyOnLoad has
still stuck around which is great.
Okay, with our game status in there.
This is the game status
from our other scene
is now in this level because we told
it not to be destroyed on load.
And you can see if we go looking for
game status, the game status that
would have loaded on this particular scene
is not there because it was destroyed.
It was told not to load.
Okay, now you probably also saw, I clicked
off play a little bit quickly there, but
you saw that our score
wasn't updating properly.
That's a good one.
That's one of those ones that if you want
to challenge then pause the video now and
have a think about why is it, see if
you can hunt down what's going on here.
Why currently is our score not updating
properly when we finish this level and
go to the other level?
This is a little bit of an advanced one so
let me do it one more time for you.
See how it's not updating back to zero,
which was what it was doing before, and
it's not updating with the previous score.
So jump in and see if you can figure that
out if you want a more advanced challenge.
If you don't want a more advanced
challenge then let's do this together.
So,what going on is when we're
playing from this scene,
we're saying the game canvas with
the Score Text is linked to Game Status.
So Game Status over here we can see
what is my Score Text we're saying these
very specific GameObject just here,
we've dragged that in to say,
you are connected to that one there.
When we go into the other scene, then the
don't destroy on load is still remembering
the score text from the other scene.
But this score text that we've
currently created in this scene
belongs to this hierarchy.
Okay so this score text here belongs to
the level one hierarchy whereas the other
score text belongs to
the level two hierarchy.
Now the way we're gonna get
around this is pretty cool.
The way we are gonna get
around this is by saying
our Singleton pattern
is now on game status.
Remember we just put that in our
game status script that says
anything to do with game
status don't destroy on load.
This also applies,
the Singleton pattern also applies
to any children that sit
underneath don't destroy on load.
So if I grab our game canvas,
drag it down underneath game status.
It is now sitting down there.
Anything under game status
with it's Singleton pattern
is also going to apply to
these elements down here.
These game objects down here.
So our game canvas won't destroy,
our score text won't destroy and
where we're saying that game status is
looking for a particular score text,
well this whole bunch is going
to continue into the next scene.
I'm gonna apply the prefab game
status because we made a change, so
I'll apply the prefab and you'll see that
our score text is no longer bold, so
we know that this connection
is all being made here.
I need to save this, go over into my
other scene and in my other scene,
I'm going to find the game canvas and
delete that.
Because if I open up game status you'll
see that our game status prefab,
clever prefabs that they are,
it knows that game canvas should
now be underneath game status.
And the game canvas here was the same
as the game canvas up there.
So we don't need two of them.
And to make sure that I am
using the prefab as we want to,
I'm just gonna delete this current
game status and drag in my prefab.
Have a look on that, when we click there,
it does have a score text.
What score text is it looking for?
It's looking for
the score text that sits underneath it.
When we click play then it
should update itself nicely.
[SOUND] It does,
the blocks are being destroyed.
Let me do just a very quick test
to make sure that we can go from
this level to the other level by getting
rid of all the blocks except for one.
And I'll click on play.
And then if we go to
the next level with 83.
What I need to do is change
the level execution order.
This is a little bit of
forcing it into shape but
I wanna double triple check that
this flow all works as it should.
So I've just switched my two scenes around
so now it's gonna start at level one and
go to level two.
When I complete this level,
we should be loading level two.
If the score continues to 83
then we know that all is good.
Excellente, so the final step
that we needed to do was just to
get rid of all of our
existing the canvas and
the game status that was in our,
for me it was level one.
And to re-dragging up prefabs so
Game Status with the proper
connection between Game Status and
Score Text exists and
that's the connection that
we have down on our prefab.
A new one.
Hopefully I can undo all
my blocks I just deleted.
Let me do a few undoes.
There we go.
I have all the blocks back in.
Okay cool.
So I know this is a little bit heavy and
I've gone really slow.
This is probably a huge lecture
in terms of length of time but
I wanted to go very slow and
careful and deliberate on it.
We've created ourselves a Singleton
pattern which is basically just a way
of saying there can be only one.
If anything else comes
along then destroy it.
And at the same time,
keep the only one, keep the only one so
that when we load a new
level it continues to exist.
And we also had a little bit of
reconnecting up of our text to
make sure it works, as well as looking at
the fact that singletons apply to children
that sit underneath it.
Anything that sits underneath
the place that we've got our Singleton
will be protected when
we load our new scene.
So great work.
If you have any questions at all
please throw them in the Q&A.
I'd love to hear from you.
If this made sense to you then I also love
to hear from you to see that you've got it
and you know what's going on.
So great stuff and
I'll see you in the next lecture.